---
title: 'ComplexMap: An R package for the integrated analysis and visualization of protein complex functional networks'
tags:
  - R
  - Bioinformatics
  - Proteomics
  - Network Analysis
  - Data Visualization
  - Gene Set Enrichment
  - Systems Biology
authors:
  - given-names: Qingzhou
    surname: Zhang
    orcid: 0000-0001-9540-2624
    affiliation: 1
  - given-names: Alla
    surname: Gagarinova
    corresponding: true
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Bailey Hall 220, Department of Biology, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada
   index: 1
date: 20 November 2025
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Cellular processes are orchestrated by dynamic assemblies of proteins that form functional complexes. Advances in high-throughput proteomics have enabled the systematic identification of hundreds to thousands of protein complexes within a single experiment [@havugimana2012census], [@pourhaghighi2020brainmap], [@huttlin2021dual]. This wealth of data provides an unprecedented opportunity to elucidate the functional organization of the cell. However, transforming large-scale complex identification data into interpretable biological knowledge remains a major challenge. Bridging this “data-to-knowledge” gap is essential for understanding cellular mechanisms, disease progression, and therapeutic target discovery.

We have developed `ComplexMap`-an R package to facilitate the functional analysis, and visualization of protein complex datasets. It offers an integrated, reproducible workflow that performs quality assessment, functional annotation, and network-based visualization. By generating interpretable “functional maps,” `ComplexMap` reveals the global landscape of cellular machinery, enabling researchers to identify key biological themes, explore inter-complex relationships, and generate hypotheses for experimental validation. The package streamlines the entire analytical process from raw complex lists to publication-ready visualizations within a unified R environment.


# Statement of Need

Biological network analysis has long been a popular topic, and several tools have been developed to address it. Cytoscape [@otasek2019cytoscape] is one of the most widely used options. However, it is designed as a Java-based graphical interface, and additional functionalities rely on community-contributed plugins. EnrichmentMap [@merico2010enrichment] is one such plugin, it supports functional analysis, but it does not perform network analysis by inferring enriched functions from user input generated by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) [@subramanian2005gene]. Another plugin, SAFE [@baryshnikova2016systematic], focuses on functional similarity network analysis and visualization, but it operates only at the gene or protein level, with functional associations inferred from experimental evidence. 

For protein complex analysis, researchers often need to use multiple disparate software tools, leading to fragmented and non-reproducible workflows. Inspired by both EnrichmentMap and SAFE, we re-framed their core concepts to focus on the functional analysis of protein complexes and implemented them within the R environment, with various parameter controls to ensure transparancy. This integration lowers the barrier to entry for biological studies and promotes rigorous research.

# Research Applications

For practical research applications, users often employ proteomics tools to predict protein complexes from protein–protein interaction networks using clustering algorithms such as MCL [@van2011using] or ClusterOne [@nepusz2012detecting]. `ComplexMap` is designed for the crucial *post-detection* phase of analysis and interpretation, which is the last step before reaching biological interpretaions.

The design of `ComplexMap` is species-agnostic, meaning it does not hardcode any specific model organism, but allows users to input data from any species. This could broaden its usability across research backgrounds. It provides an integrated, user-centric experience designed around the main `createComplexMap()` wrapper function, which generates a structured `ComplexMap` S3 object serving as a central, interoperable data container for all downstream analyses.

In a typical workflow, users provide a list of predicted protein complexes and a set of functionally annotated gene sets to initialize the analysis. The data undergo refinement to remove small complexes (size < 3) and reduce redundancy by merging highly similar complexes. Users can optionally benchmark their predictions against a reference set using similarity metrics such as sensitivity, PPV, accuracy [@zhang2012exploring], and MMR [@nepusz2012detecting]. Subsequently, the protein complexes are subjected to functional enrichment analysis based on gene set annotations using the hypergeometric test.

Edges between complexes are then established based on compositional or functional similarities, or a weighted combination of both. The functional landscape is visualized as a network using `igraph` [@igraph2023michael]. For node decoration, the most significantly enriched functions are used to define the color scheme.

`ComplexMap` also provides interactive visualizations, enabling users to explore results dynamically. By offering a seamless workflow, `ComplexMap` lowers the barrier to comprehensive protein complex analysis and promotes reproducible research. In addition, it supports parallel computing to efficiently handle thousands of complexes in a single run, maintaining low memory usage and ensuring compatibility with standard personal computers.


# References